===============
 Basic Concepts
===============

Introduction
============

The C Language Standard comprises two major components: the language
specification and the C standard library. The language specification defines
the fundamental features of C, including the abstract model, compilation and
execution environment, and basic syntactical and semantic elements. On the
other hand, the library specification defines a set of basic input/output (I/O)
and utility functions that can be used to build more complex programs than
those achievable with the language alone. These library functions provide a
standardized low-level interface that promotes language portability between
different envrionments, abstracting away the specific library implementation
details, which are often written in assembly. To start, we will focus on the
narrow scope of the language itself. Along the way, we will briefly introduce a
few common standard library functions to use as examples in explaining certain
language features. Later, we will take a more comprehensive look at the
standard library and the features it provides.

.. index:: abstract machine model

The C Abstract Machine Model
============================

The C abstract model is a conceptual model that describes how a C program is
executed. It consists of a set of rules and assumptions that define the
behavior of C programs without specifying how they should be implemented on a
particular computer or operating system. The abstract model assumes the
presence of a memory model that represents the program's memory as sequence(s)
of bytes that can be read from and written to, as well as a set of primitive
and derived data types along with a set of fundamental operations that can be
performed on them. These data types are represented as abstract objects, which
have specific properties that we will discuss below.

The abstract model also defines the order of execution of statements and the
way that functions are called and return values are passed. It specifies the
behavior of control structures such as loops and conditionals, and how they
affect program execution. Finally, the abstract model defines the rules for
program termination and error handling. Overall, the C abstract model provides
a high-level view of how C programs are executed and serves as a foundation for
understanding the language and its behavior on different platforms.

.. index:: 
   single: translation
   see:  translation unit                 ;translation
   see:  preprocessing translation unit   ;translation
   see:  preprocessing                    ;translation
   see:  program image                    ;translation
   see:  compilation                      ;translation
   see:  linking                          ;translation

Translation
====================

To understand the C programming language, it's important to understand the
translation process, which converts source code into an executable object. The
process consists of eight phases, starting with a C source file and all its
associated header and source files, collectively called a *preprocessing
translation unit*. 

Preprocessing
  The first six phases involve various text-processing steps that operate on
  the preprocessing translation unit in a purely syntactic manner, such as
  replacing comments with spaces, concatenating adjacent string literals, and
  performing pre-processor macro expansions. These steps are handled by a
  separate program called the *C preprocessor* (:command:`cpp`). The output of
  these steps is called the *translation unit*.

Compilation
  In the seventh phase, the syntactic tokens of the translation unit are
  reinterpreted semantically, and compilation takes place, producing a *compiled
  translation unit*. The standalone program which performs this task is the C
  compiler (:command:`c99`), and its output is native machine bytecode, which is
  also known as *object code*.

Linking
  In the final phase, compiled translation units and library components needed to
  satisfy external references are collected to form a *program image* that contains
  all the information needed for execution in its execution environment. In other
  words, an executable or loadable program.

.. note:: 
   In casual conversation, programmers often refer to the entire translation
   process simply as *compilation*, as it is the most significant step of the
   process, but it's very important to keep in mind that preprocessing,
   compilation, and linking are three very distinct stages and we often are
   motivated to perform only certain stages to achieve different development
   purposes. When in doubt, use the more precise terminology.

.. index:: 
   undefined behavior 
   unspecified behavior 
   locale-specific behavior
   implementation-defined behavior

Defined and Undefined Behavior
==============================

One hallmark of the C language is undefined behavior. Memory accesses outside
the bounds of an object, signed integer overflow, and various other actions
invoke undefined behavior, and there are no restrictions on how the program
might respond. This can be a source of frustration, as bugs can be difficult to
track down, appearing and disappearing under different test circumstances.

Unlike other very high level languages, like python, the C compiler assumes
that you know what you are doing, and will often happily compile code as long
as it is syntactically correct, even if it violates the C standards or invokes
undefined behavior. Because the compiler can assume undefined behavior never
happens, it can make a lot of optimizations that otherwise would not be
possible.

The broad scope of undefined behavior also makes it easier to implement a C
compiler because the implementation can ignore many edge cases. This is the
major reason why the C language became so widely adopted, because it was very
easy to port a C compiler to a different architecture, at a time when many
competing and incompatible architectures existed. It was the C language that
popularized the concept of portable code; before C, code written for one
machine had to be laboriously ported by hand to the domain-specific language
used by the target machine.

Undefined Behavior
  Valid C source code cannot implement undefined behavior. If it does so, the
  compiler may literally do anything. This is famously referred to as `nasal
  demons`_.

.. _nasal demons: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nasal_demon
  
Unspecified Behavior 
   The allowed behavior of the program is restricted to among several options,
   which the implementation may choose from, without documenting its choice.
   There is no requirement that this be a consistent choice even within the
   same program.

Implementation-defined Behavior
   The implementation may choose a behavior freely (or subject to restrictions),
   but the choice must be documented.

Locale-Specific Behavior
   The actual behavior of the program depends on the environment's locale
   during execution. Many of the string and character manipulation and
   inspection features of the standard library account for locale settings.

.. list-table:: Behavior Types
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :align: center

   * -
     - Defined
     - Consistent
     - Documented
     - Portable
   * - Undefined
     - No
     - No
     - No
     - No
   * - Unspecified
     - Yes
     - No
     - No
     - No
   * - Implementation-defined
     - Yes
     - Yes
     - Yes
     - No
   * - Locale-Specific
     - Yes
     - Locale-dependent
     - Yes
     - Yes

